Is $40,000 a small salary in the USA?
For most Americans, $50-$75k is the ideal. $30-$40k is obviously enough to work on, but it depends on your bills and your location. $50 is a nice, round number that can encompass most of the possible expenses, whereas you cannot say the same with $40k. When you break it down, most Americans end up with student loan debt to achieve that $40k job and they also will have quite a few more bills than the average European. Unless this American lives in a major metropolitan city and is consistently working a 9-5 job, they will be forced to drive to work every day. The average commute for an American is 30 minutes (by driving). That amount of money spent on gas for those commutes is exorbitant compared to the European, who has multiple transportation systems at their disposal. With the American's reliance upon cars for transportation to work, it's quite likely they have an auto loan out. Most banks force the lender to buy full coverage insurance while they are paying off their car, so that adds to the expense.Alongside transportation, most Americans buy their home and a spare bit of land. The average European lives in a flat or rents with no land, hence their house payments are cheaper. Americans love homes with land. They want that beautiful yard, the possibility of gardening, etc. For my friend who recently bought a house with her husband, their house payment (with house insurance included) is $1200. That's not that uncommon of a price for a house payment. It usually ranges from $800-$1000 over here.Unfortunately, the majority of Americans take on these three common debts (student loans, auto loans, home loans) all at the same time and usually in conjunction with credit card debt. Most people who have all of these loans out are rarely able to develop a savings. For most Americans, the ability to save and go on vacation is what determines whether their income is "enough." I cannot say whether European culture is as commodity-driven as ours (I doubt it is), but most Americans want products. They want a nice car, a nice house, and nice things to show that they are wealthy, so they sacrifice lack of debt to appear as if they are living the American dream. It's unfortunate, but true nonetheless.Dickens had one of the best lines about this in Great Expectations. In it one of the characters pulls aside Pip and says, (very rough approximation of what was said), annual income $100, annual expenditure $99.99 or $100, result happiness. Annual income $100, annual expenditure $100.01, result, going broke, unhappiness and worse.Where you live is important, lifestyle is also important. For example in most of America, you can actually walk up to someone's house and knock on their front door. You can do this to a stranger's house. In South Africa this would be considered very strange. Most "middle class" people live in gated communities or have their own fences. Most middle class people can also have servants. What you save in one area you often spend in another. The other thing to consider is what you consider "essential." One of my friends worked in Graphic Design (this is about the best that I can explain his position.) He had to have a new iPhone regularly, it was part of the "uniform."You also need to consider more than just some basic items. Housing is a very large figure in determining total cost of living and it can vary significantly between countries and even within regions. If you are curious, I suggest that you take a look at two sites. The first is the one I prefer and it sets New York as its base (Current Cost of Living Index by City ). This is the second one I'm less familiar with it (Current Cost of Living Index by City ). These guides have a lot of variation as well, for example, a "reasonably priced meal" can vary significantly. Also if you smoke a great deal this can also impact things as well.Back to your question. Yes, $40K can be a "decent" salary in the US but it depends on where you live and how you live. If you live in Manhattan, I think its fair to say that $40K might not leave you with enough for rent. It might be done but you're probably going to have to live in a bad area.One significant thing to also consider are taxes. Some US States do not have any income tax, so all you have to pay are your Federal taxes. Some States do not have Sales Taxes. Only two States do not have a Sales Tax or an Income Tax (New Hampshire and Alaska.) You could be subject to other taxes like property taxes, investment taxes etc.