Is £35,000 a year before taxes a good salary in the UK (Not in London) for a couple?
£35k/year before tax is about £27k/year after tax.No that's pretty bad for a couple. For one person living alone it's fine. Yes outside London you will be able to afford a mortgage (just about and only in cheap locations) on that, but you won't have much money leftover for much else. And if you intend on having children, then it's a pretty terrible salary. Taxes in the UK are very high, not just on income but on everyday purchases (Value added tax) and petrol/diesel (fuel duty) and insurance (Insurance Premium Tax).Food, fuel and/or public transport are all very expensive in the UK and will take out a big chunk of your salary. Regular household costs will come to probably £12-15k per year, including car and building insurance. If you want a mortgage estimate, you're going have to say where you intend to live and what kind of property you would like to own since it can vary a lot. But I would say £1000 is a good average, and so your costs will double to £24k at the least. This will leave you with almost nothing in savings.The UK is an expensive country and your wife/husband should be working as well as yourself. If the wife earns even £20k doing a minor job (that's £17k after tax), that will give you a minimally adequate savings. That’s what I earn per annum as a teacher. I’m single and not living in a particularly expensive area. My mortgage is very good and I don’t have a car. I also don’t have any pets. After bills, I’m left with £1400 or so a month. That’s more than enough for me to live on, buy people nice birthday and Christmas presents, go out drinking and to restaurants a couple of times a month and go on holiday for a couple of weeks every year. It only takes me a couple of months to save up for any serious jobs (a new boiler, or having the decking in my garden removed).For a couple, I don’t think it’s enough. Unless you’re frugal (and thus willing to accept a lower quality of life) I think you’ll struggle to save for anything. In addition, cars and pets can cost serious money, so that’s worth taking into account. No it's not good. Depending on where a couple could manage on it and live a reasonable life. If they lived rent free or very cheaply with family it wouldn't be a terrible life either. If they had housing costs to cover it would be a totally no frills lifestyle.If you're coming from a poorer area of the world then £35k might seem a lot of money. And if ones intention is to live as cheaply as possible and return after a few years it might make some sense. However UK housing and food is expensive. Travel costs can also be very high.