Newcastle board votes on $100 million takeover
The Newcastle Knights have all but confirmed a takeover by the Australian mining magnate Nathan Tinkler after the club's board approved in-principal a US$100 million proposal.Under terms of the deal, Tinkler, who also owns A-League soccer club the Newcastle Jets, guarantee US$10 million of sponsorship per year for the next 10 years. Additionally the offer will clear the Newcastle's debt, estimated between US$3 million to US$4 million.The club itself regularly achieves US$7 million in sponsorship per year meaning that Tinkler will contribute roughly US$30 million in total over the entire course of the deal. Although the board has approved the takeover, the arrangement itself will not become official until over 75 per cent of Newcastle's club members approve it. A vote is expected to take place in the next couple of months, before the start of the 2011 NRL season. NRL Knights unveil official sponsorship with beer brand NRL Knights extend sponsorship deal Regarding the vote, Tinkler said, "We think that the fans, the players, the members would like to have this done before the season starts so that everyone can concentrate on the footy and not have to worry about the diversions or distractions of financial issues or matters. I think we've got time, if we held the members meeting in the weekend of the 4th of March, the season starts on 11th March so there's certainly enough time."Newcastle Knights secure new partnership with McDonald’s Knights secure sponsor for coach The 34-year-old has also expressed an interest in setting up an NBL team in the area. Speaking to AAP, Ken Edwards, Tinkler Sports Group executive chairman, said, "We're in a range of discussions with a range of sporting organisations, including the NBL. We'd like to think that Newcastle, within the next couple of years, could have a National Basketball League franchise based here again. We're in discussions with a few other sports as well that we'll be talking about over the next few weeks." "Newcastle Knights secure new partnership with McDonald’s Knights secure sponsor for coach The 34-year-old has also expressed an interest in setting up an NBL team in the area. Speaking to AAP, Ken Edwards, Tinkler Sports Group executive chairman, said, "We're in a range of discussions with a range of sporting organisations, including the NBL. We'd like to think that Newcastle, within the next couple of years, could have a National Basketball League franchise based here again. We're in discussions with a few other sports as well that we'll be talking about over the next few weeks." The Newcastle Knights have all but confirmed a takeover by the Australian mining magnate Nathan Tinkler after the club's board approved in-principal a US$100 million proposal.Under terms of the deal, Tinkler, who also owns A-League soccer club the Newcastle Jets, guarantee US$10 million of sponsorship per year for the next 10 years. Additionally the offer will clear the Newcastle's debt, estimated between US$3 million to US$4 million. The Newcastle Knights have all but confirmed a takeover by the Australian mining magnate Nathan Tinkler after the club's board approved in-principal a US$100 million proposal.
