How Cuomo Took Advantage of #MeToo
Two summers ago, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo stared into a camera, signed a bill and made a promise to the women of New York. “Let’s actually change things,” he said, underscoring each word of resolve with a chop of his hands as he approved sweeping new protections against sexual harassment. The next day, he resumed his unwelcome pursuit of a female state trooper, according to a report released last week by the state attorney general. “Why don’t you wear a dress?” he asked her on Aug. 13, 2019, the report said. A month later, she told investigators, the governor ran an unwanted hand across her belly The complaints against Mr. Cuomo can seem dully familiar in the #MeToo era: another set of stories about awkward come-ons and young women scared of speaking up, this time set in Albany. But just as the world was waking up to the predations of powerful men several years ago — with New York City as the epicenter of the wrongdoing — Mr. Cuomo used the state’s highest office to commit fresh offenses, according to the report. All the while, he publicly aligned himself with the #MeToo movement, enhancing his reputation and generating campaign cash. Of the 11 women the report described as victims of Mr. Cuomo’s harassment, at least eight said they experienced it after early October 2017, when the revelations about sexual misconduct by the producer Harvey Weinstein broke. About that time, Mr. Cuomo asked a young aide named Lindsey Boylan to play strip poker, she said. In November 2017, as the tide of accusations against other men rose, Mr. Cuomo targeted the state trooper, asking for her to be assigned to his detail, the report said. From there, it claimed, he moved on to offenses that included groping. The three-term Democrat has denied that he “touched anyone inappropriately or made inappropriate sexual advances,” and suggested that the attorney general’s investigation was politically motivated.During that period, Mr. Cuomo not only made it easier for New Yorkers to bring forth sexual harassment claims, but approved legislation lengthening the statute of limitations for rape. As he boasted of those accomplishments at news conferences and public events, he surrounded himself with powerhouse feminists like the actress-activists Mira Sorvino and Julianne Moore. He allied himself with leaders of Time’s Up, the gender-equality organization started in the wake of the Weinstein allegations, and leaned on them for advice as he later fended off allegations. ImageMr. Cuomo with the actresses Julianne Moore, left, and Mira Sorvino as he signed a bill increasing the statute of limitations in rape cases. Mr. Cuomo with the actresses Julianne Moore, left, and Mira Sorvino as he signed a bill increasing the statute of limitations in rape cases.Credit...Seth Wenig/Associated Press He also pointed a finger at other men being held to account. “No one is above the law,” Mr. Cuomo said in a statement in May 2018, after several women accused Eric T. Schneiderman, then the state’s attorney general, of sexual violence. He urged the official to resign. The governor’s reputation was “Andrew Cuomo, your Number One feminist friend,” said Alexis Grenell, a former aide who has written about her disgust at Mr. Cuomo.So if a high-ranking politician can ignore changing social standards, flout new rules as soon as he passes them and use #MeToo for his own protection as he allegedly violates women, where does that leave the quest for progress?
