The #RestoreTheSnyderVerse Campaign Is A Great Example Of Fan Hypocrisy
Regardless of how hard it can be to find reliable performance numbers for streaming services, especially HBO Max, Zack Snyder’s Justice League was considered a resounding success for Warner Bros., at least as much of a success as a director’s cut from a three-and-a-half-year film can be. Indeed, redos are not a common thing in Hollywood with Justice League being the first movie ever to have another go at it.  At the heart of this lied the persistence of fans campaigning for so long under the #ReleaseTheSnyderCut trend which quickly took onto the real world, after Snyder’s media appearances constantly revealed not only the Snyder Cut’s existence but also the many rumors that spoke of how filming had gone down under Joss Whedon, especially for Gal Gadot. RELATED: Robert Pattinson's 'The Batman' Will Outshine The Nolan Trilogy A Snyder Cut was out there, and it couldn’t possibly be worse than Whedon’s 2017 Justice League so avid DC fans snowballed their efforts until the likes of Jason Momoa and others got on board. As the director himself made clear, for him it was about getting his “vision” out there, even if -at least up to that point- fans weren’t really completely enamored by the tone Snyder had stamped in all his previous DC films. Superman in Man of Steel Jumping over to Rotten Tomatoes reveals Man of Steel and Batman V Superman to hold only a 56% and 29% freshness rating, respectively, numbers that certainly do not speak of blockbuster levels of success or of a cult classic, but more of a misguided investment for WarnerMedia. In fact, the DCEU movies fans and critics tend to rate higher Wonder Woman, Shazam!, Aquaman and Birds of Prey, very different films that certainly don’t speak too well of this “vision” the #RestoreTheSnyderVerse movement seems so hell-bent on bringing back. Calculations for Warner Bros. are done in an entirely different way, Snyder was a lot like a sports star who starts to fade after a breakout rookie season, because while Man of Steel absolutely crushed the worldwide box office, Batman V Superman failed to do the same. In the meantime, studio executives had to see Marvel absolutely hypnotize moviegoers, even with its less than spectacular offerings. Snyders’ vision, from a business standpoint at least was nothing special, at least until the 2020 pandemic struck and suddenly it became useful to have a 4-hour superhero movie in hand that would help promote HBO Max. The biggest win for Snyder is getting his movie out there, a Justice League that stands heads and shoulders above Whedon’s, yet the question then becomes, would fans have flocked to see this Justice League back in 2017? It’s certainly impossible to answer that, but one can speculate there is a huge divide between what fans, Snyder and Warner Bros. wanted, and there’s no reason to think that has gone away. Would Justice League 2 and 3 do well? After all, Snyder has his right to make movies the way he wants them to be made, and it’s really easier to love the ideas of something rather than the actual thing.
