TikTok Calls Her the Real-Life Carrie Bradshaw #tiktok #fashion
And just like that… Carrie Bradshaw joined TikTok. Well, sort of: On the app, Carla Rockmore is sharing her eclectic outfits and styling tricks, and her followers have deemed her the real-life Carrie Bradshaw as a result. Given their shared love of bold colors, clashing pieces, and designer shoes, we would have to agree.  By day, Rockmore—who is based in Dallas, Texas—is a full-time content creator and jewelry designer. She joined TikTok in April this year, and now she already has over 540,000 followers, all of whom are obsessed with her flamboyant personal style. At 54, her ensembles are as fabulous and bold as ever. “My style is definitely eclectic and far-reaching: The one thing that stays consistent is my need to challenge my outfit, and juxtapose pieces that you wouldn’t think would work together,” says Rockmore of her wardrobe. “That’s what makes a look so interesting.”On her page, Rockmore often shares outfit ideas from inside her closet, which spans two floors and features a fireplace and spiral staircase. She will put things together like a Studio 54-themed fit, including Carolina Herrera palazzo pants and strappy platforms, or slip into a striped Christopher John Rogers dress. It’s easy to imagine Carrie wearing the exact same thing on the show (Rockmore’s amazing curly hair is also very Carrie). She’s flattered at the constant comparisons. “Carrie’s character in the show is nothing like me,” Rockmore says. “But what always resonated deeply with me was how Patricia Field styled the character.”Below, Rockmore discusses what’s in her closet, her process for creating TikToks, and what video she wants to film next.  What made you want to start creating on TikTok? There really wasn’t a set plan or strategy for this incredible journey. I was a clothing designer in my 20s and 30s, then I parlayed that into jewelry design in my 40s (and now 50s), inspired by my never-ending collection of vintage baubles. I was flying back from Jaipur, India in March 2020—where my semi-precious  jewelry line was being developed—and lockdown started the minute I arrived home. I quickly came to terms with the fact that developing anything out of India during Covid was just not going to happen for a while. It was guttural and instinctive to turn on that camera, and start expressing myself through the vast cave of treasures I’ve been collecting for more than 30 years. “It’s Important to All of Us That Our Conversations Reflect What’s Going On”—How the Digital Red Carpet is Changing Celebrity Fashion What’s your process for creating TikToks? I wish I could say that I’m methodical or strategic about the whole process. I’m not. I need to be inspired by something, and there’s this frantic immediate need in me to shoot it. I could be rifling through an old bin of bangles, or a new item arrives, or see an old movie that sparks the flame. It doesn’t matter. I know exactly what I want to film and how I want to do it. I don’t script it. I can’t; I’ve tried. I just start shooting and figure I’ll clean it up in the editing process. That’s another amazing discovery for me. I never realized how incredibly creative editing is. When you’re working on a piece you are laser focused. I get such a rush doing the editing myself and it felt good learning how to do it. I am also grateful for all of the interesting comments and questions from my followers. It has inspired me to try to incorporate many of their requests and inquiries into some of my production.
