Rating 20 Movie Makeovers, From the Lazy to the Jaw-Dropping #movie #culture
Is there a better, cheesier Hollywood trope than the makeover montage? Comedies and rom-coms love to take a leading star and give them a splashy new look—sometimes when they desperately need it, other times when they seriously don’t. But no matter what the end result serves us, you can’t deny it’s highly entertaining to watch someone go from an “ugly duckling” (however the movie defines that) to a beautiful swan. But not all transformations are equal; some are well-done, others are lazy. So, Vogue is looking back on 20 iconic movie makeovers and rating them on a scale from 1 (bad) to 5 (good). What constitutes a good movie makeover, you ask? For one, and this may seem obvious, but the “after” needs to be dramatically different. Give us some production value! Remember when they just took Rachael Leigh Cook’s glasses off in She’s All That? That earns it a low ranking in our eyes (hopefully the remake, He's All That, starring Addison Rae, will feature a better makeover). When Halle Berry morphed from Patience Phillips into Catwoman in the 2004 flick, however? Her all-leather outfit was a far cry from the shy wardrobe worn by Phillips; in other words, it was a top-tier transformation. They also to have a clear impetus. A well-done makeover will see a character go through a dramatic physical change in order for the plot to move forward. For instance: When Gracie—a tough-as-nails FBI agent— poses undercover as a beauty pageant contestant in Miss Congeniality, she’s not only getting a makeover, but going undercover to get her job done and to solve the crime at hand. But a good movie makeover does not need to be particularly ethical, either. We're basing our decisions purely on how enjoyable it is to watch, rather than how “good” it ends up being for the characters. In The Devil Wears Prada, Andy turns into a Chanel-clad fashionista not only to fit in with the Clackers, but to showcase how she loses herself and her identity in the process. These are makeovers with purpose, people! Knowing the parameters, it’s now time to sit back, scroll, and read on for our rankings.She's All That (1999) The premise: Rachel Leigh Cook’s character, Laney Boggs, is given a makeover once she starts dating Freddie Prinze Jr.’s Zack Siler, who is a popular jock that has taken on a bet to make her—gasp!—popular, too. The execution: The problem begins with Cook being objectively beautiful to begin with. The film tries to convince us otherwise, putting her in glasses and paint-splattered overalls, and deeming her “quirky” and “bookish.” Then, when she emerges in a red dress with her hair down and contacts in—voila! A star is born, as though she was a hideous monster before.Final rating: 1 out of 5 glasses. The styling? Lazy. The innovation? Non-existent. Image may contain Rumer Willis Clothing Apparel Human Person Skirt Emily Tennant Footwear Shoe and Shorts The House Bunny (2008) The premise: Zeta Alpha Zeta—a sorority house made up of socially-awkward “geeks”—meet their new house mother, named Shelley (played by the amazing Anna Farris), who is a former Playboy Bunny. With Shelley’s help, the girls all undergo a makeover in order to gain popularity, which they need for more pledges in order to save their sorority house. The execution: The girls’s makeovers is pretty standard when it comes to Hollywood makeovers: it’s for the male gaze. This means longer extensions, more makeup, and tighter clothes. None of the girls’s individual styles or personalities are taken into account, though they do decorate one house sister’s back brace with jewels. Why not! Final rating: 3 out of 5 hair extensions. Sure, it’s not the most innovative makeover, but the crew does look pretty good after. Plus, at the end of the movie, they go through the whole realization that their looks don’t really matter. Good for them. Image may contain Clothing Apparel Human Person Skirt and Miniskirt Clueless (1995) The premise: When Tai, the new girl at school, makes friends with Cher and Dionne, she most undergoes a makeover in order to hang with the popular crew. Bring in the blowdryer and eyeshadow! The execution: First, Cher and Dionne wash out Tai’s hot-red, Koolaid-dyed hair. Then, they put her in cute little mini skirts and force her to work out. Sure, Cher gets tight, white Calvin Klein dresses and Alaïa coats—but Tai seems to get her hand-me-downs. Final rating: 2.5 out of 5 Calvin Klein dresses. Cher and Dionne’s intentions were good in wanting Tai to look her best, but they didn’t have to go and make her a carbon copy of them! Plus, they totally end up creating a monster, as Tai gets caught up in being popular and it goes right to her head.
