Media portrayals of climate change and teenagers’ mindset

Climate change is arguably one of the most urgent issues facing mankind in the 21st century. Its acceleration during the past decade has brought forth a plethora of calamities, including but not limited to floods, droughts, and other natural disasters, which significantly endangers human security (World Meteorological Organisation, 2019). However, a crucial but much less mentioned impact of climate change lies in its influence on human mentality. Specifically, teenagers, one of the most psychologically vulnerable demographics, are suffering from the consequences of an unstable and increasingly hostile environment.

Various studies have been conducted regarding psychological damage associated with climate change, also known as climate grief. As climate change creates extreme weather events and exacerbates fragile ecosystems, individuals may suffer from the traumatic experiences caused by climate-induced disasters (Burke et al, 2018). For instance, residents of Carlisle, U.K. described their experience during a flood in 2005 as “horrifying” or “petrified”, as they witnessed the destruction of their livelihoods (Carroll et al., 2009). The negative impacts of climate change on mental health range from generic feelings of dread or anxiety to serious mental injuries such as post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Nevertheless, it is to be noted that environmental stressors can be indirect – simply observing the suffering of others due to climate change can negatively influence one’s mental health (American Psychological Association, 2017).

Interestingly, several researchers have pointed out that a group whose mental health may be uniquely and disproportionately affected by climate change is teenagers. Young people nowadays undergo radical physical, psychological, and social changes simultaneously, which is immensely stressful and at times overwhelming (Bilsen, 2018). The new challenges posed by climate change thus adds another dimension of uncertainty and anxiety to their inner emotional turbulence, which can lead to reduced cognitive capacity and behavioural issues (American Psychological Association, 2017). In a similar vein, Burke et al. (2018) pointed out that children affected by climate change, both directly and indirectly, may have difficulty expressing themselves emotionally, which makes them more susceptible to mental health problems as adults.

However, although ecological grief among teenagers has been studied to some extent, little attention has been paid to the role of indirect stressors in causing such grief, particularly that of media portrayals of climate change. Given the gravity of climate change as a political, economic, and social issue, it is natural that the topic is given extensive coverage in the media landscape. Moreover, as stated above, the mere sight of others in pain and the prospect of a decaying Earth can be detrimental to one’s psychological well-being. Therefore, it is worth studying how media depictions of climate change contribute to the rise of climate grief, as well as how they shape teenagers’ values and behaviours regarding environmental issues.

Hence, this paper first examines the coverage of climate change by various media platforms along with teenagers’ media consumption habits and preferences. It then analyses how the accumulation of these factors influences young people’s mental state and worldview, and finally proposes a direction for future research.

Media portrayals of climate change
Examination of traditional media
To begin with, an investigation of mass media reveals that traditional media channels such as television or newspapers are inadequate in depicting the full severity of climate change. Due to its wide-reaching impact on virtually every aspect of society, climate change has been covered extensively by the media. However, such widespread publicity does not necessarily equate with accurate reporting. As news institutions are morally obliged to uphold “neutrality” as a pillar of journalism, they often provide a platform for both climate change advocates and deniers to appear unbiased (Boykoff & Jaran, 2007). This has serious implications, since framing the existence and gravity of climate change as an ongoing debate undermines the plethora of conclusive research on this issue, and gives viewers the impression that there may still be room for doubt and inaction. Moreover, the influence of special interest groups on traditional media is not to be ignored. Corporates and industry associations can use their financial resources to manipulate prominent media institutions and thus public opinion in their favour. In the case of climate change, those in sectors with high carbon footprints, such as the American Petroleum Institute, may fund the circulation of research that disproves global warming to diverge attention from their environmentally irresponsible practices (Shapiro, 2016). In short, traditional media channels currently fail to emphasize the significance of climate change, which worsens ignorance and passivity among citizens. Fortunately, the rise of new media channels, such as social media or Youtube, now presents an entirely different approach to this topic.

Examination of new media
New media has witnessed more effective coverage of climate change thanks to certain characteristics of its enabler, the Internet. Social media sites, such as Facebook, and streaming platforms, most notably Youtube, are highly decentralised in terms of content creation. Users can generate and share their own content with others, without many of the restrictions commonly seen in established news organisations, including the moral obligation to remain “neutral”. Such freedom of speech enables climate activists and public figures to voice their opinions freely and reach a larger base of audience owing to the increasing popularity of new media (Mavrodieva et al., 2019). It is worth noting that although false information regarding climate change also exists on new media, the format of these channels allows for more direct interaction among parties involved with virtually no time limit, unlike traditional newspapers or television shows. On such platforms, audiences can understand the issue in greater depth, hence more likely to arrive at an informed conclusion. In addition, machine learning algorithms employed by new media can suggest content to users, giving climate change more exposure, especially to those already interested. This can reinforce their belief in the danger of global warming and raise their environmental consciousness. To sum up, new media helps individuals better appreciate the detrimental consequences of climate change.

Teenagers and the media
Teenagers’ media preferences
Regarding the targeted demographic of this paper, it is evident that teenagers’ media consumption preferences differ significantly from their predecessors. Teenagers of the 21st century are the first generation to grow up with global interconnectedness through the Internet, and all aspects of their lives are affected by this development. As explained above, the type of media consumed by each individual has a great impact on their perception of climate change. Therefore, to understand how teenagers view this environmental problem, it is crucial to analyse whether they consume more new or traditional media. Research has pointed out that adolescents receive news more often from social media or Youtube than from traditional news outlets (Common Sense Media, 2019). There also seems to be an inverse correlation between age and the degree of Internet utilisation as the main news source; the younger generations are, the more they prefer the Internet over the television and newspapers (Pew Research Center, 2010). Visuals, delivery speed, and convenience may be factors that facilitated the popularity of new media among teenagers. These findings have important implications, as they suggest that given such news consumption habits, teenagers may have very different opinions of climate change compared to other demographics. Moreover, their opinions, influenced by the media, can become major forces shaping their attitudes and behaviours.

The significance of media to teenagers
The shift of preferred media channels can drastically reshape teenagers’ mindset and actions. Adolescent years witness drastic physical and psychological changes, which tend to have a lasting impact well into adulthood, making them identity-forming years (Strasburger et al., 2014). The identity-forming process relies heavily on the information and opinions teenagers acquire from the media (Manago, n.d.). This means teenagers gather data about the external world from media channels and select from that collection of data what they wish to believe in, along with what they do not. In times long past, adolescents mainly received this knowledge from their social circle, including family and friends, or their community. However, since the rise of technology, modern media has eclipsed these sources as the main link between teenagers and the world around them. A survey from Pew Research Center (2018) has demonstrated that almost all teenagers own a personal technological device, be it a smartphone or a computer, and 45% claim that they use the Internet “almost constantly”. This constant exposure to mass media now informs teenagers and drives their identity formation, which in turn determines how they think and act. Therefore, their media consumption habits during these formative years not only shape their views of climate change but can also affect their mental health and climate advocacy.

Impacts of media portrayals of climate change on teenagers
Trigger of climate grief
Having considered media portrayals of climate change as well as teenagers’ media consumption, a connection can be made between media coverage and teenagers’ climate grief. Although climate grief appears among all age groups, one can argue that it damages teenagers disproportionately due to their media preferences. As stated above, new media has provided a source for more accurate climate change journalism. Therefore, teenagers, who prefer new media channels, are more capable of grasping the true severity of the issue. Moreover, news on social media or streaming platforms commonly features graphic visual content of climate disasters such as wildfires or tornadoes at a high frequency. Such an alarming stream of information may be overwhelming to teenagers’ fragile psyche and induce climate grief, even when they do not suffer directly from climate change. Lertzman (2019) likens the environmental anxiety teenagers now face to the threat of nuclear destruction during the Cold War for Baby Boomers, as both crises pose an existential threat that was beyond individual control. This comparison serves to highlight the degree of distress and hopelessness young people experience and partially explain the origins of their decreasing mental health. It is also worth noting that the escalation of both of the threats coincides with a shift in the media landscape, as the Cold War witnessed the golden age of television over radio, while the 21st century witnessed the rise of new media. These changes both allow teenagers to receive information more vividly and frequently, and thus made an exceptionally strong impact on teenagers’ mindset.

Motivation for eco-awareness and climate activism
The interplay between traditional and new media also influences teenagers’ behaviour. As mentioned above, traditional media frames the gravity of climate change as debatable, contrary to the abundance of existing research which clearly points out its disastrous effects. Teenagers, who have already understood the severity of the problem, may interpret such framing as representative of the status quo’s ignorance and inaction. This will deepen their frustration with the establishment and those in power, specifically adults who seem to neglect their descendants’ looming climate disaster for their personal gains (Holmberg & Alvinius, 2020). Their concerns are not entirely unfounded, as research shows that existing environmental policies may underplay the economic and social ramifications of climate change, and leave dire consequences to future generations (Dietz et al., 2016). Therefore, the clash between different types of media in climate change coverage can prompt teenagers to take the issue into their own hands by participating in climate activism. This finding is significant as youth activism has become prominent in recent years, exemplified by figures such as Greta Thunberg, who participates in the global political forums. On a smaller scale, teenagers appear to be more environmentally conscious than their predecessors in virtually all aspects of life, including but not limited to fashion, transportation, and leisure. Furthermore, it is surprising that contrary to common belief, the failure of traditional media does not reduce but boost environmental awareness among young people. Recognizing this unexpected impact of media on individual behaviour can play a crucial role in augmenting media coverage in the future, especially via promoting new media to more demographics.

Conclusion
Evaluation and implications of findings
This paper set out to explore the mechanisms by which media depictions of climate change affect teenagers’ mental well-being and behaviour. It examined the incompetence of traditional media in climate change coverage due to rigid journalistic norms and personal interests, in contrast to the effectiveness of new media thanks to its decentralised format. Given this characterisation, it would appear that the influence of media on teenagers is twofold. New media informs teenagers of the devastating consequences of climate change with an overwhelming quantity of graphic visual content, which may trigger indirect climate grief and severe mental health issues. The resultant fear, coupled with the knowledge of the establishment’s inaction through traditional media, can motivate teenagers to actively participate in climate activism. These findings serve to underline the vulnerability of adolescents to the impacts of climate change, which contrary to common knowledge, are not limited to those who directly suffer from climate disasters. Since this paper has pointed out other indirect mechanisms by which teenagers are damaged, society as a whole can pay more attention to the mental health of young people and minimize the appearance of stressors. Another valuable observation of this paper is the power of the media on adolescents, specifically how it can influence teenagers’ mindset and lifestyle. In the light of this finding, psychologists must collaborate with journalists to develop new standards for media content which uplifts the young to replace the current inadequate approach.

Limitation of existing research and direction for future research
It is important to acknowledge that the current research is still limited by a lack of literature regarding the new media landscape. The paper assumed that new media is free from special interests, which is largely true at the time of writing. Nevertheless, in recent years, corporates and industry associations have started to fund research on social media strategies to manipulate public sentiment. For instance, the record shows that in less than a year, from May 2018 to October 2019, fossil fuel companies in the U.S. have spent $17 million on social media campaigns on Facebook alone to downplay the impact of climate change (InfluenceMap, 2019). Therefore, future studies should analyse the methods by which these campaigns attempt to distort the discourse on climate change. This can help activists devise suitable countermeasures to protect the efficacy of new media and prevent citizens, especially teenagers, from forming false beliefs. To sum up, the relationship between mass media and climate change is complicated and extremely impactful. Therefore, it must be moderated carefully to ensure that the public is well-informed on the gravity of the issue and properly encouraged to protect the environment. Greta Thunberg said it herself: “We have to tell it like it is. Because if there are no positive things to tell, then what should we do, should we spread false hope? We can’t do that, we have to tell the truth.”