Here’s how a $300 and $400 unemployment boost compare
Congress is on the cusp of raising weekly pay for unemployed workers by $300 a week.The American Rescue Plan, passed Saturday by the Senate, offers a $300-a-week increase in unemployment benefits. The supplement would last until Sept. The House is voting this week on the Covid relief bill.But the House had earlier passed a version of the aid package that offered a larger, $400 weekly supplement. Democrats reached a compromise to reduce the supplement to placate Sen. Joe Manchin, D-W.V.More from Personal Finance:$1,400 stimulus checks are included in Congress’ new relief package American Rescue Plan creates a tax headache for the unemployed There are pros and cons to working from home “My top priority throughout these negotiations has been securing the strongest possible deal for jobless workers that could pass the Senate. This agreement achieves that,” Senate Finance Committee hairman Ron Wyden, D-Ore., said Friday.President Joe Biden is expected to sign the $1.9 trillion relief measure this week, before temporary unemployment programs expire March 14.$300 vs. $400 a week A $300 weekly increase in weekly unemployment benefits would come on top of standard state benefits. Workers got $324 a week in state benefits, on average, in the third quarter last year, according to most recent U.S. Labor Department data. That aid replaced about 38% of their average pre-layoff wage, which was $847 a week.The Senate approved President Biden’s $1.9 trillion coronavirus relief package — Here’s what happens next An extra $300 a week would bump that replacement rate to 74%, according to a CNBC analysis. A $400 weekly raise would have bumped it higher, to 85%.By comparison, a $600-a-week enhancement offered by the CARES Act last year replaced 100% of lost wages for the average jobless worker.State differences The $300 supplement would go further in some states, especially those that tend to pay more meager benefits.In Mississippi, for example, the average worker got $190 in weekly benefits in January, the least among all states, according to the U.S. Labor Department. An extra $300 a week there would more than double their current allotment.Weekly advice on managing your Money Get this delivered to your inbox, and more info about about our products and services. By signing up for newsletters, you are agreeing to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Massachusetts, on the other hand, paid $521 a week to the average person, the largest amount among the states in January. A $300 enhancement in Massachusetts would offer a larger overall payout ($851 a week) compared to the Mississippi worker, but would be well short of doubling the initial aid.More than 18 million Americans were collecting unemployment benefits as of mid-February, according to the Labor Department.Dr. Scott Gottlieb told CNBC on Monday the current surge in Covid infections caused by the more contagious delta variant may be the “final wave” of the virus in the United States.“I don’t think Covid is going to be epidemic all through the fall and the winter. I think that this is the final wave, the final act, assuming we don’t have a variant emerge that pierces the immunity offered by prior infection or vaccination,” the former Food and Drug Administration commissioner said on “Squawk Box.” “This is probably going to be the wave of infection that ends up affecting the people who refuse to get vaccinated.”Gottlieb said Americans have a couple months remaining where they need to take pandemic-related precautions, particularly in northern U.S. states as cases begin to peak in the South, until the wave of infections begins to decrease again.“I think this is going to be a difficult period right now,” he said. However, Gottlieb said the contagious nature of the delta variant and increased vaccination rates could change the trajectory of future infections.“We’re going to reach some level of populationwide exposure to this virus, either through vaccination or through prior infection that’s going to stop circulating at this level, at this rate,” said Gottlieb, who led the FDA from 2017 to 2019 under the Donald Trump administration.
