Is £50,000 a year a good enough salary to live in London?
Assuming that is your pre-tax salary, you are looking at around 36k to do away with. In short - yes this is a good salary, but not as good as you think in the current market.The biggest expense is rent, as always. Since Boris Johnson set the affordable housing cap at £2,800 per month, you should expect to pay a minimum of £2,000 per month for private housing. I say private housing because you are not going to get a council house when you earn £50k a year, especially considering as scarce as they are. That means you are looking at about £24k a year in rent, and you will only really be looking at a 1 or 2 bedroom flat if within zone 2, unless you are lucky enough to find a house for that price. House sharing is possible but at £50k a year I assume you really don't want to do that. If within zone 1, you'll get a 1 bedroom or studio flat. Don't expect a house. From zone 3/4 onwards, you could get a simple 2 bedroom house - nothing fancy but livable. Follow this principle - higher the zone, better the quality of housing options available.You are left with £12k a year. This will need to pay for travel, regardless. You will be travelling at peak times, so for a yearly travelcard you are looking at between £1,284 for zones 1-2 and £2,344 for zones 1-6. Let's say you live in zone 2 and, let's be honest, most of your time will be spent in zones 1-4, so we'll say £1,844. This enables you to travel within London to the best nightclubs, attractions, so on and so forth. If you have a car, that's a different story. Including petrol, insurance, MOT, congestion charge fee etc, it will likely add up to more, so we won't even consider that for now. Stick to buses, trains, tube.You now have £10.1k left and some change to spend as you will. Clothes, clubbing, entrance fees for exhibits or whatever you like to do, dating - these all add it, but they can't really be accounted for because it depends entirely on your taste and preferences. It can, however, very easily amount to a minimum of 5k (and that's being conservative) because London is a very expensive place.You are left with a maximum of £5.1k in your account to save and you can very easily be left with less. £0.00 is only a few purchases away. Congratulations. Most Londoners never legally achieve this without going into debt, though gentrification is changing all that. Your lifestyle will be better than most but still only "average" in the grand scheme of things. You can live a life without much worry unless something major blindsides you and can have a blast doing so - a 25 year old's dream.Oh yea, if you are into drugs, even something as minor as weed, you have £0.00 left. Such was the dream. Now, it is no more.