They Were Laughed At For Their #FreeBritney Activism. Not Anymore
It used to be that friends and family laughed when Leanne Simmons told them about her #FreeBritney activism. They'd tell her to grow up, that she wasn't 9 years old anymore. Why would anyone care so much about Britney Spears, anyway? Embarrassed, Simmons would find comfort online, talking on Britney message boards and to friends on social media.These days, people don't laugh as much. But it wouldn't matter to Simmons either way."This is not a joke. This is very serious," Simmons says. "And if people want to make fun of me, I don't care, because I'm fighting for what's right."Chris Crocker, 'Leave Britney Alone' Video Creator, Reflects On What's Changed ARTS & LIFE Chris Crocker, 'Leave Britney Alone' Video Creator, Reflects On What's Changed Who Is Mathew Rosengart, Britney Spears' New Lawyer? LAW Who Is Mathew Rosengart, Britney Spears' New Lawyer?Simmons runs freebritney.army and is just one of a growing number of people advocating for California courts to release pop star Britney Spears from her conservatorship, under the banner #FreeBritney. It's a fluid, grassroots movement in which members share and analyze court documents, help one another understand the ins and outs of guardianship law, organize in-person rallies around the world, and get the word out about Spears' story."It does feel vindicating" "When the movement started, we were painted as conspiracy theorists and really dismissed," says Kevin Wu, co-founder of the FreeBritneyLA accounts on Twitter and Instagram. Even though their sourcing was often based on court documents, Wu says it felt like they were never given any credibility. "It was frustrating that it took as long as it did, but it does feel vindicating that the movement and our concerns are finally being taken seriously.”Article continues after sponsor message That changed in part thanks to Framing Britney Spears, the documentary from The New York Times and FX that helped bring wider attention to the pop star's story. But the major shifts in Spears' legal fight in the past few weeks have been proof enough that these true believers were onto something, even getting a shoutout from the pop star herself.Of course, many #FreeBritney activists started as Britney Spears fans from back in the day. Some have gotten used to being dismissed. "I felt like even before the conservatorship, we had to defend ourselves for liking her," Simmons says. She was used to pushing back against music snobs who dinged Spears for lip-syncing or viewed her as just a pop star, who was manufactured by the machinery of the music industry. "It was kind of a smooth transition from defending why I'm a Britney fan to defending her human rights," says Simmons.But even more casual fans were so shocked by the details of Spears' story that they felt compelled to do  something about it. Pilar Vigneaux is a #FreeBritney supporter based in Papudo, Chile. She says she liked Spears enough but didn't obsess over knowing all her songs or even owning all of her albums. But as she read deeper into the oddity of Spears being in a conservatorship at all, her kids being taken away from her and her father spending all her money, Vigneaux felt a growing urge."If you are really able to put yourself in her shoes for three seconds, you can't just not get involved," she says. She emailed Wu and asked whether FreeBritneyLA was sending out press releases. Wu said no, so she volunteered to put her skills from her day job at a communications company to use.
