A New Exhibition Celebrating Black Jewelry Designers Is Coming to New York #fashion
It’s no secret that the glittering world of haute joaillerie has traditionally favored ‘Africa-inspired’ design over designers of African descent. But Melanie Grant, journalist and author of Coveted: Art and Innovation in High Jewelry, hopes to remedy that with a first-of-its-kind selling exhibition, in partnership with Sotheby’s New York. Opening on September 17th, Brilliant and Black: A Jewelry Renaissance will showcase the work of 21 Black designers from across the US and Europe. The show, curated by Grant in partnership with Sotheby's director of jewelry Frank Everett, will feature roughly 60 pieces, with prices starting at $1,500. At the top end of the scale is a million-dollar ring that has been custom-made for the occasion by Maggi Simpkins. If it sells, it will set a record for the most expensive jewel by a Black designer sold at a major global auction house. This landmark price tag reflects Grant’s belief that, “economic power is the basis for real change,” and represents a watershed moment for an industry which has historically been dominated by the white, wealthy, and well-connected. There are various reasons for this. For one thing, high-level collectors are far more likely to buy from established brands. “Why would they choose you over somebody they've already spoken to for generations?” Grant says. That’s not to mention the fact that getting your hands on the biggest, best stones requires relationships, and these are often centuries deep. Then, there are the financial resources required to buy said stones. “[Jewelry designers] might have a piece that sits there for over 10 years and doesn't sell,” says Grant. “Who can afford to do that?”All of this has ensured that high jewelry remains an exclusive club. But there is a certain irony in the fact that Black designers remain underrepresented, when a sizable chunk of the resources used are sourced in Africa. Many of those involved in Brilliant and Black are inspired by the continent and seek to promote genuine, African-led artistry. Vania Leles’s work for her label Vanleles, for example, is an homage to her home country of Guinea Bissau. She sources gems responsibly from African mines, and her ‘Enchanted Garden’ earrings, embellished with dazzling Mozambique rubies, are a nod to African fabrics. Castro NYC—purveyor of uncanny, gem-encrusted doll necklaces—is inspired by the continent, too. Castro has been making since the early 2000s, but tells me that showing at Sotheby’s ultimately means more exposure, the opportunity “to show a prestige audience what they might have ignored or be ignorant to.” For independent designers without a hefty marketing budget, building a profile is challenging, and the other designers involved in Brilliant and Black echo Castro’s sentiment. London-based maker Thelma West is contributing a ring called ‘Rebel Black’, so named for its inky band and longer-than-average pear-cut diamond. “As a creator you need your work to get enough eyes,” she says. “This exhibition gives this group of incredibly talented designers from different walks of life unprecedented international visibility and recognition.” 

