Buddhism in Vietnamese philosophy

The development of Vietnamese philosophical thinking is one of great complexity. As the nation experiences vicissitudes throughout its tempestuous history, its thinkers constantly absorb and transform foreign ideologies to create a truly unique Vietnamese intellectual tradition. Among the chief contributors to this tradition is Buddhism, one of the world’s most remarkable religions. This paper will thus attempt to explore the central tenets of Buddhism, then present reasons for its strong influence in Vietnam. Finally, it will examine the impact of Buddhism on two major fields that most represent Vietnamese philosophical thinking: politics and education.

Vietnamese philosophy diverges from the typical academic definition of philosophy in certain key ways. Philosophy is most commonly known as the investigation of important questions that form the foundation of human existence and society. Major branches include metaphysics - the study of reality, epistemology - the study of knowledge, logic - the study of reasoning, and ethics - the study of morality. Philosophical thinking is characterised by its systematicness and rigorous methodology, and ideas can often be credited to certain individuals or schools of thought. Nevertheless, for the majority of its development, Vietnamese philosophy does not necessarily align with these traits. The agrarian society model of ancient Vietnam bound its members to community traditions, which to some extent hinders independent critical thinking. A turbulent history marked with invasion and forced cultural assimilation further limited Vietnamese thinkers from creating their personal ideologies, instead leading them to adapt existing religions and doctrines to fit circumstances. Moreover, to Vietnamese intellectuals, philosophy was less of an individual pursuit or an intellectual subject than a way of life (Vu, 2000). They are chiefly interested in the branch of ethics and its application to politics and education, which then affects culture and eventually forms the basis of national identity. Therefore, Vietnamese philosophy can best be viewed as a practical synthesis of major religions and worldviews, the most prominent of which is arguably Buddhism, whose influence can be observed clearly in the Vietnamese way of life.

Buddhism is one of the world’s most significant religions. It was founded in India, based on the teachings of a legendary figure called “the Buddha”, meaning “the Enlightened One”. Legend has it that he was a wealthy prince who rejected worldly pleasures of the court to seek wisdom in asceticism. While meditating under the shades of a pipal tree, he realised three crucial facts about existence: that all things are impermanent (“anicca”), that all beings are in pain (“dukkha”), and that there is no independent self (“anatta”). Humans fail to recognise these three marks of existence and suffer greatly as a result. The only path to liberate oneself from such suffering is to accept these truths and resign all desires. By practicing principles known as “the Noble Eightfold Path”, one can eventually reach “nirvana”, commonly understood as eternal peace of mind. The Buddha dedicated the remainder of his life to spreading this philosophy to others throughout the Ganges valley. After his death, successors provided different interpretations of his teachings, which constituted two main schools of Buddhism: Theravada and Mahayana. The former, which translates to “Way of the Elders”, is the oldest existing school and emphasises the individual pursuit of nirvana by strictly following Buddha’s path. The latter, which translates to “Great Vehicle”, contrarily stresses the responsibility of the Buddha and bodhisattvas (“wisdom beings”) for providing salvation to all beings. Each school gains dominance in different regions around the world, yet ultimately both serve to heighten Buddhism’s status as a major cultural and social force, particularly in Vietnam.

One of the reasons for Buddhism’s profound influence on Vietnamese national identity is its long history with the nation. The earliest missionary monks most likely arrived in Vietnam directly from India en route their journey to spread the religion to China, though some scholars believe that Buddhism first reached Vietnam via the Chinese. Either way, by the end of the 1st century CE, Buddhism had been recognized by the first independent dynasty of Đại Việt, the Đinh dynasty, as the national faith, demonstrating its high esteem in Vietnamese society (Nguyen, 2008). Later, during the Lý dynasty, Buddhism reached its zenith with the rise to power of a Buddhist king, Lý Thái Tổ. The monarch was raised in a pagoda under the tutelage of Vạn Hạnh, the most prominent Buddhist figure of the time. Consequently, throughout his reign, he supported the construction of Buddhist temples around the country, further cementing the stature of the religion. The succeeding rulers of the Trần dynasty extended their predecessors’ reverence for Buddhism, exemplified by the creation of the only indigenous sect of Buddhism in Vietnam, Trúc Lâm. It is also worth noting that during this period, Buddhist monks played a crucial role in the Vietnamese government. As monks learned Chinese to study scriptures, they became state servants in various important positions such as imperial advisors, officials, or diplomats, which allowed them to exert more influence on societal issues (McLeod & Nguyen, 2001). During the later Lê and Nguyễn dynasties, Buddhism’s position was challenged by Confucianism and Christianity. Nevertheless, by this point, it had become so ingrained in the Vietnamese collective unconscious that attempts to limit its impact proved to be counter-effective. Therefore, it is evident that given its long-standing history with Vietnam since the very beginning of the nation, there is no doubt that Buddhism is one of the pillars of Vietnamese thinking.

The alignment of Buddhist teachings with certain traits of Vietnamese people also helps the religion resonate deeply with Vietnamese culture and philosophy of life. As mentioned above, Vietnamese thinkers are not preoccupied with metaphysical speculation, as philosophy is first and foremost a way of life. Buddhism shares a similar sentiment, as it believes that since life on Earth is limited, one should not waste time on inquiries that fail to relieve suffering (Nhat Hanh, 2005). Moreover, virtues extolled in Buddhism, especially by the Mahayana school, such as compassion and humility are also highly regarded by Vietnamese people. As Vietnam originated as an agricultural, rice-growing society, collectivist values as these may have ensured that individuals can collaborate and grow together (Talhelm et al., 2014). Finally, as the teachings of Buddhism are universal and seek to create social harmony by encouraging mutual respect and generosity (Sangsri, 2019), their implementation could support rulers in creating a sense of unity, which was much needed given the nation’s long history of foreign invasions. These factors may have made it easier for Buddhism to integrate into Vietnamese society compared to other Western religions such as Christianity or even Eastern doctrines such as Confucianism. They also allow Buddhism to wield a strong, long-lasting influence on Vietnamese spirituality and inner lives, most observable in politics and education.

As stated above, the impact of Buddhism on Vietnamese philosophical thinking can be examined in two key aspects: politics and education. In terms of politics, Buddhism teachings set the standard for the ideal monarch, which was most refined during the Trần dynasty. Each king should embody moral virtues and is responsible not only for administration but also for the spiritual well-being of his subjects. The Buddha emphasises that a king must gain the support of citizens via just ruling, demonstrated by elements such as liberality, affability, justice, and impartiality. Furthermore, as Buddhism denies the existence of the ego, a monarch could not justify leading a lavish lifestyle at the expense of his subjects. Rather, leadership must be cultivated through careful deliberation and meditation (Anh, 2002). Such high expectations of a ruler contributed significantly to the success of the Lý and Trần dynasty, and are still prevalent in modern Vietnamese society. Leaders are supposed to gain the respect of their subordinates by demonstrating exemplary behaviour themselves and must act as the spiritual anchor of the entire organisation. Ho Chi Minh, arguably the most influential leading figure of Vietnam history, also followed this line of thinking, stating: ”Always pay attention to the interests of the people. Thus, the new people trust their officials and accept them as their leaders.”

Buddhism also played a major role in Vietnamese education. During the earliest years of Vietnamese independence, due to the turbulent political climate and the constant threat of invasion from China, resources were mainly used for military purposes instead of setting up schools. Therefore, Buddhist temples with monks well-educated in Chinese were the ideal hubs for education (Dao, 1938). They nurtured some of the most brilliant thinkers in Vietnamese history, including the founder of the Lý dynasty, Lý Thái Tổ, and the youngest ever “trạng nguyên” or highest-ranking scholar of the Imperial Examination, Nguyễn Hiền. In terms of educational content, Buddhism along with Confucianism and Daoism formed the bulk of the material taught to scholars during the Lý and Trần dynasties. One may argue that during later dynasties, Confucianism eclipsed Buddhism as the main doctrine. However, this argument does not take into account the informal education conducted outside of schools. For instance, every Vietnamese mother has at least once taught their children to “ở hiền gặp lành”, or to live kindly so as to receive good fortune in return. This principle has its roots in the Buddhist concept of “karma”, which states that whatever happens to a person is a result of their own behaviour. Therefore, it can be observed that Buddhism is so entrenched in the Vietnamese subconscious that both academic and civic education were and are still affected by its teachings.

In conclusion, it is indisputable that Buddhism exerts one of, if not the most dominant influence on Vietnamese philosophical thinking. Thanks to its extended history with the nation as well as its affinity with traditional traits of the Vietnamese character, its impact on the nation’s way of life, specifically in politics and education, is virtually unparalleled by other ideologies. The unique integration of Buddhism into national identity has enhanced the strength of the nation, allowing it to grow according to principles of unity and kindness. In the future, Buddhist principles will most likely continue to permeate the Vietnamese way of life, guiding its followers through great turbulence and opportunities ahead.